Documenting expected behaviour of intersection types (#13384)
enso-org/enso: docs/types/intersection-types.md

type check a new value is created to satisfy just the types requested in the
check.

## Preserving identity of refined types

> Intersection types are used to refine a value giving it additional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intersection types are often used to refine a value with additional
```

functionality. For example, a value `table : Table & DB_Table` represents a
table coming from a database that has both the base `Table` methods that all
tables share but also database-specific methods from `DB_Table`. Either part of
this compound type may get _hidden_ when passing around various methods (e.g.
`table:Table` will hide the `DB_Table` part), but the value itself still retains
its identity as a `Table & DB_Table` and can be uncovered via a cast or a case

> expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expression during runtime.
```

> It is important to ensure that various operations do not accidentally remove a

Reviewer: - I don't like the term _various operations_
- it only spreads FUD
- there is no point of being so vague in the documentation
- if you have to, move it into a "warning" or "notice" section
- e.g. a colloquial knowledge, not part of the spec

part of the intersection type as then the value completely loses its part of
functionality. If the `DB_Table` part is not hidden, but completely removed, the
table can no longer be casted to `DB_Table` and used as such. This is confusing
for users, as a database table cannot suddenly stop being a database table just
by passing it around (including method calls) or casting.

Consider a multi value `x : A & B`. We indicate hidden types as `(hidden T)` -
they are not visible in the actual type, but can be uncovered via casts or
reflection.

To ensure the above properties, the interpreter ensures that the following

> operations only hide the intersection type, but do not remove it:

Reviewer: Here is a short version:
```suggestion
To ensure intersection types properly propagate thru the Enso program the 
basic language constructs are designed to handle them properly. Namely:
```
the actual wording  can be different, but I'd prefer the _positive focus_ rather than description of catharsis in the docs.

- casting `x : A` will hide the `B` part, so the actual type is
  `x : A & (hidden B)`.
- inspecting the type via `case of`, e.g.
  ```
  case x of

>       a : A -> ...

Reviewer 2: What happens in this case?
```suggestion
      b : B -> ...
      a : A -> ...
```

Reviewer: `case of` patterns do not invoke conversions, but they will uncover the hidden `~B` type thus following program prints `it is a B`:
```ruby
type A
type B

B.from (_:A) = B

main =
    ab = A : (A&B)
    case ab of
        _:B -> "it is a B"
        _:A -> "it is a A"
        _ -> "none"
```
not sure how to put it into the test. Any idea to include this reply into the document, @AdRiley?

      _ -> ...
  ```
  in the first branch, the `a` has visible type `A` but the full type is still
  `a : A & (hidden B)` - the `B` part is hidden, but not removed.

> - dispatching a method on one of the types, e.g. calling `x.method_defined_on_A`

Reviewer 2: Is it the same when calling a method defined on a hidden type? `x.method_defined_on_B`?

  will pass the value `x` as `self` to the body of `method_defined_on_A`, the
  `self` will have a visible type `A`, but the full type is still
  `self : A & (hidden B)` - so the `self` value can be casted if needed.

> - normally, calling conversions will 'start over' and the value returned from

Reviewer 2: What happens if there are conversions from both `A` and `B` to some other type? Do unhidden ones take precedence over hidden ones?

Reviewer: > ... unhidden ones take prededence ...

Only visible types  are considered for conversions. E.g. following program panics as `A & ~B` cannot be cast to `C`:
```ruby
type A
type B
type C

B.from (_:A) = B
C.from (_:B) = C

main =
    ab = A : (A&B)
    a = ab:A
    a:C
```

  one will not have an intersection type anymore. However, as long as possible,
  even conversions should try to use existing (even if hidden) parts of the type
  instead of calling into the conversion code; thus:
  - calling `A.from x` will return a value of type `A & (hidden B)` - the `B`
    part is still there (only hidden), because no actual conversion code had to
    be run - the type was simply extracted from the intersection type.
  - similarly, calling `B.from x` will return a value of type `B & (hidden A)` -
    the `A` part is still there (only hidden), because no actual conversion code
    had to be run.

> 

Reviewer: Please note the use of _these operations_ rather than _various operations_ ;-)

```suggestion
It is important to ensure these operations do not remove a part of the intersection type.
Otherwise the value loses part of its functionality which would have a detrimental effect
in the GUI, confusing users. 
If the `DB_Table` part is not kept as hidden, but completely removed, the
table can no longer be casted to `DB_Table` and used as such.
```

A little Cassandra's warning at the end may be acceptable...

type check a new value is created to satisfy just the types requested in the
check.

## Preserving identity of refined types

Intersection types are often used to refine a value with additional
functionality. For example, a value `table : Table & DB_Table` represents a
table coming from a database that has both the base `Table` methods that all
tables share but also database-specific methods from `DB_Table`. Either part of

> this compound type may get _hidden_ when passing around various methods (e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this compound type may get _hidden_ when passing around various type checks (e.g.
```

`table:Table` will hide the `DB_Table` part), but the value itself still retains

> its identity as a `Table & DB_Table` and can be uncovered via a cast or a case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its identity as a `Table & DB_Table` and can be uncovered via a cast or a `case of`
```

expression during runtime.

To ensure intersection types properly propagate thru the Enso program the 
basic language constructs are designed to handle them properly. Namely:

- casting `x : A` will hide the `B` part, so the actual type is

>   `x : A & (hidden B)`.

Reviewer: Running following Enso program in 2025.3 version yields `A & ~B`:
```ruby
type A
type B

B.from (that:A) = B

main =
    ab = A : (A&B)
    a = ab:B
    a.to_display_text
```
thus let's write it as
```suggestion
  `x : A & ~B`.
```

- inspecting the type via `case of`, e.g.
  ```
  case x of
      a : A -> ...
      _ -> ...
  ```
  in the first branch, the `a` has visible type `A` but the full type is still

>   `a : A & (hidden B)` - the `B` part is hidden, but not removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `a : A & ~B` - the `B` part is hidden, but not removed.
```

- dispatching a method on one of the types, e.g. calling `x.method_defined_on_A`
  will pass the value `x` as `self` to the body of `method_defined_on_A`, the
  `self` will have a visible type `A`, but the full type is still

>   `self : A & (hidden B)` - so the `self` value can be casted if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `self : A & ~B` - so the `self` value can be cast if needed.
```

- normally, calling conversions will 'start over' and the value returned from
  one will not have an intersection type anymore. However, as long as possible,
  even conversions should try to use existing (even if hidden) parts of the type
  instead of calling into the conversion code; thus:

>   - calling `A.from x` will return a value of type `A & (hidden B)` - the `B`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - calling `A.from x` will return a value of type `A & ~B` - the `B`
```

    part is still there (only hidden), because no actual conversion code had to
    be run - the type was simply extracted from the intersection type.

>   - similarly, calling `B.from x` will return a value of type `B & (hidden A)` -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - similarly, calling `B.from x` will return a value of type `B & ~A` -
```

>     the `A` part is still there (only hidden), because no actual conversion code

Reviewer: Example:
```ruby
type A
type B

B.from (_:A) = B

main =
    ab = A : (A&B)
    x = B.from (ab:A)
    x.to_display_text
```

    had to be run.
It is important to ensure these operations do not remove a part of the intersection type.
Otherwise the value loses part of its functionality which would have a detrimental effect
in the GUI, confusing users. 
If the `DB_Table` part is not kept as hidden, but completely removed, the

> table can no longer be casted to `DB_Table` and used as such.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
table can no longer be cast to `DB_Table` and used as such.
```

type_, but _cast down_ to the original type is `==` and has the same `hash` as
the original value. E.g. `4.2 : Complex&Float : Float` is `==` and has the same
`hash` as `4.2` (in spite it _can be cast to_ `Complex`).

> ### TODO
> 
> - self preserves intersection types, just hides them
> - case of also
> - T.from should preserve if no conversion was made (e.g. T was among visible or
>   hidden types)

Reviewer: - I don't understand purpose of this TODO
- I suggest to remove it
```suggestion
```
